---
layout: page
title: "Functional bass"
date: 2013-11-22 09:25
comments: true
sharing: true
footer: true
---

Wednesday's class was a little rough, as some of you took issue with the introduction of functional bass. I've reflected on this a fair bit myself, talked to a few of you, and talked to Carter (who has talked to a few of you also). It seems like the discomfort that occurred for some of you was not simply due to the introduction of something new, but due to a combination of different circumstances: not only was there new material, but it came the week before break, a number of you had not done the preperatory work assigned, and those of you in Carter's theory class had not covered all of the chromatic chords yet. Given how simple functional bass is, and how little of it is actually *new* (you all already know T/S/D, bass scale degrees, figured bass, prolongation, etc.), I am certain that had all of the above factors not met each other in a single class meeting, this would not have been such a big deal. 

You all also performed very well on our first attempt at bass and melody sing-backs: just about everyone sang back the bass or melody perfectly on one hearing for a five-chord progression. (The dictations we'll be focusing on in the final assessment are about twice as long, so dictating outer voices in four hearings or so should be a piece of cake for most of you.) Part of this is because the complexity of each outer voice is less than that of the melodies we've been dealing with in our transcription and dictation the past few weeks, and because I have *intentionally* been including melodic patterns in our singbacks that include the standard patterns that pop up in these sorts of bass lines.

All that is to say that while it seems to some of you like we're beginning a new and complicated unit very close to the end of the semester, we are not. Functional bass is the *only* truly new addition to class at this point, and it is a bringing together of things you are already familiar with in a way that I believe will make the harmonic listening tasks easier once you set about to learning it. (And if not, you will have other experiences on which to draw, as well.)

It is also apparent that *assessment* is driving a fair portion of the anxiety here. If this were simply a matter of an expert providing you a new approach to something you are learning that may be helpful for you, it wouldn't be much of an issue. However, the thought of final assessments coming up soon looms large in many of your minds—and understandably so. However, my primary job is to teach you and help you grow in your musicianship, only secondarily to assess whether you have mastered the material by the arbitrary (and often pedagogically unhelpful) deadlines at the ends of semesters. Likewise, your job is first to grow in your musicianship and only secondarily (and as much after-the-fact as possible) to demonstrate to me that you have mastered the material in a complete way. 

Of course, I understand the reality of grades, GPA, scholarships, etc. However, I am confident that those of you *who have been putting a reasonable effort* into your theory and aural skills work throughout the semester will have absolutely no problem mastering the harmonic listening tasks I'll put before you in these final weeks. And if not, please know that *when final grades are determined, I will not hold anyone responsible for something that the class has not been adequately prepared for*. If it becomes clear in the final class meetings that even the students who are putting full effort into the class are having significant trouble with something, I will cut it from the list of final assessments and we will revisit it in the spring. (Keep in mind that students in the other sections have the same aural skills curriculum and the same theory instructors, and will likely be having the same issues.)

I hope that alleviates some of your concerns about grades and assessment. And I hope that our work together after fall break will alleviate your concerns about the content, to the extent that you are concerned. However, this issue has brought up a couple other concerns that I think are important to address. Because of that, I'd like to present a few ideas that I'd like you to keep in mind as we progress throughout this year, and as you progress through your musical development.

First, *education is more than the transfer of information*. This is obvious in Aural *Skills*, where the application of concepts in real musical tasks is in the title of the course, but it is true in Music Theory, as well. Education involves the transfer of information, of course. However, you are at university and not simply reading books because there are things more important, and more difficult, than simply memorizing information. Those things include the assimilation of concepts and the application of those concepts in musical activity. Some professors are content to settle for the transfer of information. I (and many of my colleagues at CU) am not. Assimilating concepts often requires multiple perspectives on the requisite information (especially when attempting to reach a group of students who have different backgrounds, learning abilities, etc.). It also requires attempts at applying the material, attempts which are harder than taking notes and regurgitating them on a test, and often take longer than a single class meeting or homework assignment to figure out. For those of you who grew up post-No-Child-Left-Behind and are used to information-centered courses that "test early and test often," this will be uncomfortable and will feel, initially, ineffective. However, there is a mammoth amount of research to show that doing hard things and working to apply concepts leads to deeper, longer-lasting learning than lecture, baby-step homework, and a test you can cram for. That's a big reason that I don't lecture or use workbooks: you need to do hard things and engage multiple routes through the material if you are to truly understand and master it.

Second, *education is training for life, not just a career, and certainly not just a job upon graduation*. You are paying too much money and putting too much time into your education for it to be valuable for a few years of work only. We need to help you develop skills that will last your entire career (which could be upwards of 50 years). We don't have all the information that will be required of musicians working in 2060. However, we can help you develop the skills of inquiry and analysis that you will need to figure out how to work in those new settings. We can also give you multiple approaches to a single topic so that you can 1) see that there are always a diversity of ways to understand a single topic, and 2) have more tools at your disposal to choose from when facing something new that was not anticipated by your textbook's authors or your professors. Ask your private studio teachers, ensemble conductors, or other seasoned professionals you respect (in any field) what was their most valuable educational experience that has prepared them for their life and career. Was it a series of lectures? Was it a textbook reading? A workbook assignment? Or a hard project—maybe even one they created themselves—for which there was no textbook or how-to guide, but which pushed them to develop new ways of thinking about their work, and led them to create something they didn't think they were capable of? You will get plenty of lectures and readings in your college education. I want to give you the tools and experiences that will help you develop the ability to do good, hard work when there are no lectures and readings. 

Third, *you are not my employees, and grades are not your remuneration for a day's work*. Unfortunately, many students take this approach, and they think they are doing themselves a favor when they can minimize their workload while maximizing their "salary" (GPA). However, you are paying me. Don't think about your education as work for a boss who tells you what to do, and you do it as efficiently as possible. You are making an investment. If you want the greatest return on your investment (which is not only, or even chiefly, financial), you need professors who will give you everything they can to help you achieve your musical goals, and you need to follow up on your financial investment (tuition) with the time, energy, and commitment that will allow you to reap benefits from your courses. Education is not a commodity that can be purchased; it is a process. Your tuition does not buy learning; it buys the opportunity to learn. I will do what I can to see that that opportunity isn't squandered, but you need to do so as well in order for that opportunity to bear fruit.

Finally, *I am not perfect*. Nor are any of your professors. We are experts in the fields we teach, and many of us are experts in the art of teaching. However, we make mistakes. We also have an imperfect university structure to work within (semesters, grades, class schedules, etc.), and each pass through the material brings new students with different experiences, backgrounds, skills, sensitivities, prejudices, loves, career goals, life goals, financial situations, etc. There is no one way—often not even a best way—to teach a topic to a student, let alone one best way to teach a topic to 15 or 40 (or 400) students simultaneously. So even when we do our jobs well, it won't fit everyone. This is why I resist one-size-fits-all teaching, but even then, we likely won't cover the "best" way for *every* student in a class to work through the material—and that's before you factor in my/our mistakes in teaching and in discerning what are the "best" ways to take a class through a topic. So please be patient. And please feel free to continue to speak your mind. As we talk through these issues, you may grow in your understanding of the value of what we are doing together (even if in some areas, the value is more for your colleagues than for you), and I may grow in my understanding of where you are and what you need in order to grow in your musicianship. As long as we don't take accusatory tones with each other and sincerely pursue a common understanding, we will make progress—even if ultimately no one changes their minds. That is why I am sharing these thoughts with you all. I don't want to simply cram it down your throat, saying "take your medicine." On the other hand, I have thought about these issues long and hard and have insights to share with you besides just the information that you can already find in the textbook you purchased months ago. (In fact, all of the concerns you raised on Wednesday are things that Carter and I discussed before the semester even started, and we made our decisions taking those concerns, any many others, to heart.) So I ask you to trust me that I know what I'm doing, but also to be open to sharing your concerns and struggles with me so that we can maximize the value of our two hours per week together, as I help you pursue your goals as musicians and as human beings.

Please feel free to email me, or schedule a video chat, during break if you want to talk about these things, or to schedule an appointment during my office hours when we return, if you'd like to talk about these or other matters further. My goal is the same as yours: to help you become the best musicians and the most well-rounded, educated people as possible. Let's work together as best we can to pursue that goal.